Imagine you are half-starved, blindfolded, then placed into a large gymnasium
with a plate full of freshly-baked cookies. How do you find the cookies? You
could try to randomly walk around until you step on them. Interestingly, you
are mathematically guaranteed to reach the cookies this way, even if the gym is
infinitely large^[1], but that could take a very long time, and you’re hungry
now. Luckily, you can use your senses to speed things up.

It turns out that smell is the only useful sense here, as your vision is
blocked and your other senses are either too short-ranged (taste, touch) or
functionally unable (hearing) to help you find the cookies. But, generally, you
cannot use smell to turn towards distant objects, because the change in odor
intensity is too weak to detect when standing in place and turning around. So
how can you find the cookies?

You could start by sniffing, walking for a while, then sniffing again. If the
odor got stronger, then you must be moving towards the cookies. Great! You
should keep moving in that direction. If the smell got weaker, that’s okay;
just spin around and try again in a new direction. By following this procedure
you will reach the cookies much more quickly than before (Figure 1).

It turns out that many bacteria use this cookie-finding procedure to help them
move towards food, and in this context the procedure is called chemotaxis. Why
do bacteria need to do this? Well, many kinds of bacteria can move using a
flagella, which is a long filament that sticks off of the cell surface and
rotates, working like a propeller to push the cell forward. But just like our
noses are too weak to directly help us turn toward the cookies, bacteria are
too small to directly sense the direction food is in. So bacteria use
chemotaxis to move towards their food by swimming, sensing whether it has moved
towards or away from the food, then deciding whether to keep swimming in the
same direction or to change directions.

But there’s a hidden assumption here. Think back to the cookie-finding
procedure. You smelled, walked, then smelled again and compared the current
smell to the previous smell. That means that you need to remember what the
smell was previously. Can bacteria actually do this? It turns out the answer is
yes. A series of chemical reactions inside of the cell stores information about
how strong the “smell” of the food was previously, so that the bacteria can
tell if they have moved toward or away from the food source.

The reason chemotaxis works so well for bacteria is that, at the size of a
bacterium, diffusion spreads chemicals into gradients very quickly. In fact,
the bacterial world is dominated by diffusion-generated chemical gradients.
This is hugely different from the world we normally see, where diffusion plays
a only minor role^[2]. From a bacterial point of view, the world is a series of
chemical gradients that can lead them toward food or away from predators, and
chemotaxis enables the cells to navigate these gradients effectively.

Joshua Franklin, MSU
