metabolism
----------
The following is a quote from a 2007 interview with Freeman Dyson.

"We know modern life has both metabolism and replication, but they're carried
out by separate groups of molecules. Metabolism is carried out by proteins and
all kinds of small molecules, and replication is carried out by DNA and RNA.
That maybe is a clue to the fact that they started out separate rather than
together. So my version of the origin of life is it started with metabolism
only.

You had what I call the garbage bag model. The early cells were just little
bags of some kind of cell membrane, which might have been oily or it might have
been a metal oxide.  And inside you had a more or less random collection of
organic molecules, with the characteristic that small molecules could diffuse
in through the membrane, but big molecules could not diffuse out. By converting
small molecules into big molecules, you could concentrate the organic contents
on the inside, so the cells would become more concentrated and the chemistry
would gradually become more efficient. So these things could evolve without any
kind of replication.  It's a simple statistical inheritance.  When a cell
became so big that it got cut in half, or shaken in half, by some rainstorm or
environmental disturbance, it would then produce two cells which would be its
daughters, which would inherit, more or less, but only statistically, the
chemical machinery inside.  Evolution could work under those conditions."


implementation
--------------

So basically, he thinks evolution started as a Lamarckian process, and then
something happened later on to introduce functionality for replication and
inherited genetic material.

How would we implement this? We really only need one fundamental operation,
which is metabolism. In the python implementation of bees in this repo, we had
two "object types" in the environment, which were agents and food.

This seems wrong. Probably better to have everything be an agent. Garbage bags
maybe form randomly, so they're drawn from some distribution. All agents are
functions, which take in some input.

Okay so there's got to be some sort of notion of an "observation" which is made
at each timestep. What can agents see? Let's take a 2D grid world, do we want
to give them structured data? A matrix of inputs around them? This seems a
little too advanced. It's like they're these little bags of organic molecules
made up of a lipid membrane, but they have fully-formed human eyes for some
reason.

We want them to be able to access information about their environment if they
happen to evolve a mechanism for doing so. Vision seems like one of the more
complicated senses, though. What senses do bacteria have, or protozoa?
Archaea?

It probably doesn't make any sense to take lessons from eukaryotes. Modern-day
archaea are already super-evolved from whatever the first garbage bag
"organisms" looked like, if that model is true.

It seems we want the most simplified model of interactions between an agent and
its surrounding chemistry as is possible. Perhaps the environment randomly
fluctuates in temperature, and temperature can vary across location. Perhaps
it's a smooth scalar field or something, so just a C-infty function on a
manifold.

Propulsion is probably another thing which is wayyyyyy too complex to hardcode
into the agents. It probably took a ton of generations for even the most basic
functionality for propulsion to develop.

It might not even make sense to have it be a gridworld.
